blastxmlparser is listed at http://biogems.info

= bio-blastxmlparser

blastxmlparser is a very fast big-data BLAST XML file parser, which can be
used as command line utility, or as a Ruby library. Rather than
loading everything in memory, XML is parsed by BLAST query
(Iteration). Not only has this the advantage of low memory use, it
also shows results early, and it may be faster when IO continues in
parallel (disk read-ahead).

Next to the API, blastxmlparser comes as a command line utility, which
can be used to filter results and requires no understanding of Ruby.

= Quick start

  gem install bio-blastxmlparser
  blastxmlparser --help

(see Installation, below, if it does not work)

== Performance

XML parsing is expensive. blastxmlparser uses the fast Nokogiri C, or Java, XML
parsers, based on libxml2. Basically, a DOM parser is used for subsections of a
document. Tests show this is faster than a SAX parser with Ruby callbacks.  To
see why libxml2 based Nokogiri is fast, see
http://www.rubyinside.com/ruby-xml-performance-benchmarks-1641.html and
http://www.xml.com/lpt/a/1703. 

The parser is also designed with other optimizations, such as lazy
evaluation, i.e. only creating objects when required, and (in a future
version) parallelization. When parsing a full BLAST result usually
only a few fields are used. By using XPath queries only the relevant
fields are queried.

Timings for parsing test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7 (file size 3.4Mb) 

  bio-blastxmlparser + Nokogiri DOM (default)

  real    0m1.259s
  user    0m1.052s
  sys     0m0.144s

  bio-blastxmlparser + Nokogiri split DOM

  real    0m1.713s
  user    0m1.444s
  sys     0m0.160s

  BioRuby ReXML DOM parser (old style)

  real    1m14.548s
  user    1m13.065s
  sys     0m0.472s

== Install

  gem install bio-blastxmlparser

Important: the parser is written for Ruby >= 1.9. You can check with

  ruby -v
  gem env

Nokogiri XML parser is required. To install it,
the libxml2 libraries and headers need to be installed first, for
example on Debian:

  apt-get install libxslt-dev libxml2-dev
  gem install bio-blastxmlparser

for more installation on other platforms see
http://nokogiri.org/tutorials/installing_nokogiri.html. 

== Command line usage

=== Usage
  blastxmlparser [options] file(s)

    -p, --parser name                Use full|split parser (default full)
        --output-fasta               Output FASTA
    -n, --named fields               Set named fields
    -e, --exec filter                Execute filter

        --logger filename            Log to file (default stderr)
        --trace options              Set log level (default INFO, see bio-logger)
    -q, --quiet                      Run quietly
    -v, --verbose                    Run verbosely
        --debug                      Show debug messages
    -h, --help                       Show help and examples

  bioblastxmlparser filename(s)

    Use --help switch for more information

=== Examples

Print result fields of iterations containing 'lcl', using a regex

  blastxmlparser -e 'iter.query_id=~/lcl/' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

Print fields where bit_score > 145

  blastxmlparser -e 'hsp.bit_score>145' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

prints a tab delimited

  1       1       lcl|1_0 lcl|I_74685     1       5.82208e-34
  2       1       lcl|1_0 lcl|I_1 1       5.82208e-34
  3       2       lcl|2_0 lcl|I_2 1       6.05436e-59
  4       3       lcl|3_0 lcl|I_3 1       2.03876e-56

The second and third column show the BLAST iteration, and the others
relate to the hits.

As this is evaluated Ruby, it is also possible to use the XML element
names directly

  blastxmlparser -e 'hsp["Hsp_bit-score"].to_i>145' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

And it is possible to print (non default) named fields where E-value < 0.001 
and hit length > 100. E.g.

  blastxmlparser -n 'hsp.evalue,hsp.qseq' -e 'hsp.evalue<0.01 and hit.len>100' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

  1       5.82208e-34     AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCT...
  2       5.82208e-34     AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCT...
  3       2.76378e-11     AATATGGTAGCTACAGAAACGGTAGTACACTCTTC     
  4       1.13373e-13     CTAAACACAGGAGCATATAGGTTGGCAGGCAGGCAAAAT 
  5       2.76378e-11     GAAGAGTGTACTACCGTTTCTGTAGCTACCATATT     
  etc. etc.

prints the evalue and qseq columns. To output FASTA use --output-fasta

  blastxmlparser --output-fasta -e 'hsp.evalue<0.01 and hit.len>100' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

which prints matching sequences, where the first field is the accession, followed
by query iteration id, and hit_id. E.g.

  >I_74685 1|lcl|1_0 lcl|I_74685 [57809 - 57666] (REVERSE SENSE) 
  AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCTGCCTGCCAACCTATATGCTCCTGTGTTTAG
  >I_1 1|lcl|1_0 lcl|I_1 [477 - 884] 
  AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCTGCCTGCCAACCTATATGCTCCTGTGTTTAG
  etc. etc.

To use the low-mem (iterated slower) version of the parser use

  blastxmlparser --parser split -n 'hsp.evalue,hsp.qseq' -e 'hsp.evalue<0.01 and hit.len>100' test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7

== API (Ruby library)

To loop through a BLAST result:

    >> require 'bio-blastxmlparser'
    >> fn = 'test/data/nt_example_blastn.m7'
    >>   n = Bio::BlastXMLParser::XmlIterator.new(fn).to_enum
    >>   n.each do | iter |
    >>     puts "Hits for " + iter.query_id
    >>     iter.each do | hit |
    >>       hit.each do | hsp |
    >>         print hit.hit_id, "\t", hsp.evalue, "\n" if hsp.evalue < 0.001
    >>       end
    >>     end
    >>   end

The next example parses XML using less memory by using a Ruby
Iterator

    >> blast = Bio::BlastXMLParser::XmlSplitterIterator.new(fn).to_enum
    >> iter = blast.next
    >> iter.iter_num
    => 1
    >> iter.query_id
    => "lcl|1_0"

Get the first hit

    >> hit = iter.hits.first
    >> hit.hit_num
    => 1
    >> hit.hit_id
    => "lcl|I_74685"
    >> hit.hit_def
    => "[57809 - 57666] (REVERSE SENSE) "
    >> hit.accession
    => "I_74685"
    >> hit.len
    => 144

Get the parent info

    >> hit.parent.query_id
    => "lcl|1_0"
 
Get the first Hsp

    >> hsp = hit.hsps.first
    >> hsp.hsp_num
    => 1
    >> hsp.bit_score
    => 145.205
    >> hsp.score
    => 73
    >> hsp.evalue
    => 5.82208e-34
    >> hsp.query_from
    => 28
    >> hsp.query_to
    => 100
    >> hsp.query_frame
    => 1
    >> hsp.hit_frame
    => 1
    >> hsp.identity
    => 73
    >> hsp.positive
    => 73
    >> hsp.align_len
    => 73
    >> hsp.qseq
    => "AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCTGCCTGCCAACCTATATGCTCCTGTGTTTAG"
    >> hsp.hseq
    => "AGTGAAGCTTCTAGATATTTGGCGGGTACCTCTAATTTTGCCTGCCTGCCAACCTATATGCTCCTGTGTTTAG"
    >> hsp.midline
    => "|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||"

Unlike BioRuby, this module uses the actual element names in the XML
definition, to avoid confusion (if anyone wants a translation,
feel free to contribute an adaptor).

It is also possible to use the XML element names as Strings, rather
than methods. E.g.

    >> hsp.field("Hsp_bit-score")
    => "145.205"
    >> hsp["Hsp_bit-score"]
    => "145.205"

Note that, when using the element names, the results are always String values.

Fetch the next result (Iteration)

    >> iter2 = blast.next
    >> iter2.iter_num
    >> 2 
    >> iter2.query_id
    => "lcl|2_0"

etc. etc.

For more examples see the files in ./spec

== URL

The project lives at http://github.com/pjotrp/blastxmlparser. If you use this software, please cite http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq475

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011,2012 Pjotr Prins under the MIT licence.  See LICENSE.txt and http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.html for further details.

